# Modeled changes in leaf shape across grapevine shoots discriminate species better than individual leaves and identify *Vitis* hybrids

This repository contains the data and code used to produce the figures and tables for the manuscript **Modeled changes in leaf shape across grapevine shoots discriminate species better than individual leaves and identify *Vitis* hybrids**.

### Figure legends

**Figure 1: Examples of changes in leaf traits across grapevine shoots.** Photos of vineyard-collected leaves, from the tip (top of stack) to base (bottom of stack), before scanning from the indicated species. Size, shape, and color, among many other traits, vary from node to node. Adaxial sides of leaves are shown except for *V. riparia*. Images are not to scale relative to each other.

**Figure 2: Quantifying leaf shape changes across the shoot. A)** Two *Vitis labrusca* leaves from the second (left) and fourth (right) nodes from the shoot tip. The 21 landmarks used in this study are indicated on the left side of the leaves. Lobe tips, sinuses, and associated nomenclature are indicated on the right side of leaves. Leaves are scaled to show allometric decreases in the ratio of vein-to-blade area that occur during leaf expansion. **B)** Examples of size and shape changes in leaves across example *V. riparia* and *V. labrusca* shoots. Shoot tip, shoot base, nodes, and scale are indicated. Leaves in (A) are from the *V. labrusca* shoot shown here. **C)** Diagrammatic representation of the methods to quantify leaf shape changes across the shoot. Leaves are first superimposed and scaled using Procrustean methods. Shown are outlines formed by the Procrustean coordinates of the blade of the leaves shown in (B). Relative node position is calculated as the node number counting from the tip divided by total leaf count for the shoot, such that all nodes are assigned a fractional value between 0 and 1. Coordinate x and y values are modeled as a function of relative node position. Dots connected between leaves by the dotted line correspond to landmark 19 of the distal sinus.

**Figure 3: Modeled coordinate values across grapevine shoots.** For each x and y coordinate of the 21 landmarks, superimposed and scaled Procrustean values are modeled as a second order polynomial of relative node position for four species with contrasting leaf shapes. All leaves from shoots of the indicated species are used. *Vitis riparia*, orange; *V. rupestris*, blue; *V. acerifolia*, green; *Ampelopsis glandulosa* var. *brevipedunculata*, magenta.

**Figure 4: Modeled leaf shapes across grapevine shoots.** For each species, modeled leaf shapes for ten relative node positions across the shoot are superimposed and illustrated. All leaves from shoots of the indicated species are used. Species are grouped by relatedness: **A)** *Vitis riparia*, *V. acerifolia*, *V. rupestris*; **B)** *V. cinerea*, *V. vulpina*; **C)** *V. aestivalis*, *V. labrusca*; **D)** *V. coignetiae*, *V. amurensis*; **E)** *V. palmata*; **F)** *Ampelopsis glandulosa* var. *brevipedunculata*. For each species, the number of leaves and vines sampled is given (note that every vine is sampled across four years, yielding a pseudoreplication of four). Modeled leaves are colored as a gradient from black (the shoot tip, node 1) to purple (the shoot base, node 10) as indicated.

**Figure 5: Comparison of Principal Component Analysis (PCA) results for individual leaves vs. modeled shoots. A)** Eigenleaf representations of shape variance at +/- 3 standard deviations explained by Principal Components (PCs) for a PCA performed on all individual leaves. Percent variance explained by each PC is provided. **B-C)** Comparison of results from two separate PCAs, one on all individual leaves (B) and the other on modeled shoot values (C). 95% confidence ellipses for four species (*Vitis riparia*, orange; *V. acerifolia*, green; *V. rupestris*, blue; *Ampelopsis glandulosa* var. *brevipedunculata*, magenta) are provided in addition to all data points (gray) to compare the ability of the two methods to discriminate species. **D)** Relative shoot position discretized into nodes counting from one (the shoot tip, red) to ten (the shoot base, blue), projected onto the individual leaf PCA space. For relative node position, there is no modeled shoot PCA as nodes are accounted for and integrated into the resulting values for that analysis. **E-F)** Individual leaf (E) and modeled shoot (F) PCAs with 95% confidence ellipses for each year (2013, magenta; 2015, forest green; 2016, gold; 2017, dark purple).

**Figure 6: Comparison of Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) results for individual leaves vs. modeled shoots. A-B)** Comparison of results as confusion matrices of two separate LDAs, one on all individual leaves (A) and the other on modeled shoot values (B). Proportion of actual species (vertical) assigned to predicted species identity (horizontal) is indicated by color. *Vitis* hybrids and *Vitis* species are not used in the training set and only assigned identity in in the test set. **C)** Confusion matrix for an LDA performed on relative shoot position discretized into ten nodes across the shoot for individual leaves. For relative node position, there is no modeled shoot LDA as nodes are accounted for and integrated into the resulting values for that analysis. **D-E)** Individual leaf (D) and modeled shoot (E) LDAs predicting year. All panels use the indicated color scheme for assigned proportion from 0 (white) to 1 (dark green).

**Figure 7: Comparing species identity predictions based on morphology to population structure. A)** Population composition proportion for each individual using K = 10 from ADMIXTURE. Each population is assigned a different color. Species designations for each vine are as previously assigned for this collection, without prior genetic knowledge, and arranged by known phylogenetic relationships. Vines with genetic identities at odds with their assigned species identity are indicated by black arrows and lowercase roman numerals. *Vitis riparia* x *V. labrusca hybrids* are indicated by gray lines and corresponding vine numbers. **B)** For *Vitis* spp. with genetic information, population composition (left) and predicted morphological species identity for each shoot from each of four years (right) is provided. Morphological predictions consistent with genetic identity are indicated in bold. **C)** Principal Component Analysis (PCA) of the same individuals in (A). Vines with conflicting assigned and genetic identities are indicated by black arrows and lowercase roman numerals and *V. riparia* x *V. labrusca* hybrids are indicated by gray lines and vine identification numbers as in (A). *Vitis* spp. in (B) are indicated by black dots and vine identification numbers. Species are indicated by colors which do not correspond with the color scheme of other panels and the number of vines with genetic information is provided.

**Figure 8: Intermediate leaf shapes of *Vitis riparia* x *V. labrusca* hybrids. A)** Population composition proportion for *Vitis riparia* x *V. labrusca* hybrids. Vine identification numbers are provided. **B)** Principal Component Analysis (PCA) based on averaged modeled shoot values across years for *V. riparia* (orange) and *V. labrusca* (blue) vines, hybrids (black points), and *V.* x*novae-angliae*. 95% confidence ellipses are provided. C) Superimposed average leaf shapes for *V. riparia* (orange), *V. labrusca* (blue), and hybrids (gray). Hybrids and *V.* x*novae-angliae* are compared to parents individually and together.

**Table 1: Comparison of species prediction using LDA for individual leaves vs. modeled shoots.

**Table 2: Relative shoot position prediction using LDA for individual leaves.

**Table 3: Comparison of year prediction using LDA for individual leaves vs. modeled shoots.
